And so, again, welcome. Thanks for taking the time to be here and practice and reflect a little
on the teachings. And as usual, just we'll take a few moments. I'm sure we've already
begun this process, but just to say it out loud and put the spotlight on the fundamental
reorienting and connecting with our pure, virtuous motivation, our joy, our appreciation
of our precious, fleeting situation, and really expand that we can take in this moment and
truly be of authentic, genuine, ever-present benefit to beings through our study, contemplation,
meditation, which is to say, expand our bodhicitta, open our mind and heart to every living being,
and rest in that true nature as best we can in all ways to remove our own obscurations
to that shining in order to help mature and bring out that innate beauty and freedom for
every living being without exception throughout all time and space, and then also the purity
view of our pure vision and pure perception of the sacredness of this moment and the perfect
nature of right now, and then, of course, as part of our practice in the living practice
and lineage, connecting with our joy, our appreciation, our bodhicitta, our pure perception,
our trust and closeness feeling to the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, Guru, Deva, Dakini, all embodied
as the pure and precious Lama, we train again and again to reflect on these four thoughts
that turn our mind and heart towards the Dharma, towards what's reliable, towards what's truly
a benefit not only in this world, but any world and all worlds, and so the last couple sessions
we've been, I've been talking about the 12 nidanas as they reflect to Karma, so again
these four thoughts that turn the mind towards the Dharma are what is known as the outer
or the common nundra practices, reflecting on, of course, our precious human birth with
all its freedoms and endowments, reflecting on impermanence everywhere we look, reflecting
on the inevitability that all of our actions will have their results, sooner or later,
and reflecting on, then again, the defects of samsara, how samsara is nothing but challenges,
samsara is born of ignorance, and therefore, wherever we go, there'll be confusion and
hope and fear, and so the last couple sessions I was trying to review a little bit these
12 links or these 12 nidanas which is specifically looking at this thought of looking at the
inevitability of Karma and how Karma works, and of course, Karma means action, sometimes
maybe in our popular culture, the understanding of Karma is only kind of half understood and
that may be in kind of more pop culture, Karma seen as just results, but as we know in Buddhism
Karma is both results and their causes, of course that's the, if the fundamental first
teaching the Buddha gave in this world, the four noble truths, the truth of suffering,
the truth of samsara, and the truth of the cause of suffering, the cause of samsara,
the truth of the cessation of suffering or nirvana, and the truth of the causes and path
to attaining the cessation of suffering, and the citadel of nirvana which is to say enlightenment,
and so again I'm not going to go over it again because I've already done it a couple of times,
but these 12 links are just very, very helpful from the first turning teachings of the Buddha
and really illustrating kind of how Karma works, how every moment unfolds due to our
habitual patterns which are again, while we all have everything, samsara nirvana is grounded
in the true nature of mind and the openness and vastness state of mind, due to ignorance
we experience the wheel of samsara, encyclic existence, and if we're going to get anything
out of those 12 links, right, it's looking at these two places in which we can work with
starting to dismantle samsara and work on reducing our negative habitual patterns and
increasing our positive habitual patterns and increasing our familiarity with the openness
and the true nature of our own mind, and so removing our ignorance and also refraining
from harm, refraining and engaging in benefit, these are the two accumulations that we have
in our practice, right, so the results of virtuous and unvirtuous actions which are
causes are inevitable, are inexorable is what we chant in our durjum terso nundro in reflecting
on these four thoughts, so just reflecting on the very fact like all these 12 nadanas
is maybe so technical, that's why I just thought to maybe share a little bit, think a little
bit on kind of what really has heart and meaning and really can connect us with the preciousness
of being aware of the truth of cause and effect, the truth of the natural law of karma, which
is essentially that all our actions matter. As long as we have ignorance, our wheel of
samsara is going to be turning, but we can little by little, little by little break that
down, so right all the buddhas from everything that comes from a cause, the Buddha has described
the cause and also the result, and then also are the whole training refrained from harm,
which in benefit tame our own mind. So in the teachings of course, there are actions to
avoid, actions to engage in as we increase our wisdom. So again, I think there's so many
places we've probably gone over in these teachings and from our venerable teachers as well as
in so many great books really illustrating, but really again to just remind ourselves
and maybe we can each look individually the ten non-virtues and the ten virtues. So again
right we have three by body, four by speech, three by mind, these three doors. So the ten
things really everyone, whether you're Buddhist or non-Buddhists probably, can understand
is what causes disharmony for ourselves and others. In other words, un-virtuous activities
are the three by body, I think you know, and again we'll reflect taking life, killing,
breaking what's not given, stealing, sexual misconduct, disrespecting others and ourselves,
and then four by speech, lying, deceiving speech, sowing discord and kind of divisive speech,
speech that separates people, causes more fear, more suspicion, more anger and closed
up barriers between people, so divisive speech, harsh speech, and then just worthless chatter.
And then the three by mind, covetousness, always wanting more, needing more, greedy,
harmful, angry thoughts, and then wrong views. And here again it's very specific in the teachings,
wrong views here, usually the first point that's brought up is the wrong view that none
of our actions matter. So just by being more aware of the law of karma and reflecting upon
it and really seeing for ourselves whatever amount we can that seeing how it's true is
definitely correcting the wrong view that our actions don't matter, but also of course
is the wrong view of just that I exist, that the world substantially, independently, permanently
exists, all those wrong views too. So those are basically things we can avoid and then
classically there's also these other aspects of just actions that really cause negative
effects. And again, negative effects for who? Of course others, but mainly ourselves sooner
or later. So again, we don't really have a whole lot of time, but it can be found other
places like the five crimes that have immediate consequence upon when we die, which are those
are really connected again, any actions that we create that cause harm to those who have
given us protection and knowledge and nurtured us is we're really causing big trouble. And
then of course there's many lists of other aspects, but then again, these are things
to avoid. What do we engage? What is then bringing benefit, more harmony, more strength,
more dynamic and naturalness. So again, refraining from all of these 10 actions and along with
them, again, looking at these three doors by body, not only refraining from taking life,
but nurturing, protecting life, not only refraining from taking what's not given, but training
to give generously whatever we can, without any attachment or expectation of anything
in return. With our body refraining from sexual misconduct, which is to say, respect ourselves,
respect our others, physically, psychologically, respect the vows that we ourselves have taken,
as well as the commitments and vows others have taken. Refraining from deceit, which
means speaking honestly, truthfully, you know, refraining from divisive speech, and in turn,
speech that helps bring more understanding, more harmony, more dialogue and openness and
camaraderie between people. Speaking gently, kindly, and then of course speaking meaningfully.
And then again, turning these three poisons of the mind, the three wrong actions of our
mind, so whenever being more content, appreciating what we have, who we are, where we are, having
a more loving, kind heart and mind, and then being mindful of the law of cause and effect.
Being more mindful, training on our meditation, bringing out more wisdom. So again, just going
over those. Sorry if you've heard it so many times, but again, the point is being mindful,
what makes an action virtuous or non virtuous? It's mind, right? It's really these last three
activities of mind, and how they reflect not only within our habitual thinking and inner
dialogue and inner atmosphere, but how we reflect that out with our speech with our
body. So what makes something more virtuous or not is the degree of love, wisdom, compassion
that we sit with and act from. What makes something non virtuous is how much attachment,
anger, ignorance, clinging, you know, our actions spring from. So of course, for most
of us, it's kind of mixed. But the point is being mindful, connecting with our motivation,
again and again and again, this mindfulness, alertness, conscientiousness. Again, it's been
said before, and it's so important to remember, it's what's within the 12 nidanas and repeated
throughout all the teachings, you know, we can't necessarily change what arises. Everything
that arises is due to our past actions. And the frame of mind that we were in the views
we held, you know, correct or incorrect or wherever in the spectrum that goes, everything
we experience on the inner level, when our perceptions in our circumstances is the result
of our past actions, and the motivations and the state of mind in which we did them. But
of course, we're not slave to our circumstances. We can be. But again, as Dharma practitioners,
we're working towards our own freedom and the freedom of everyone, which is to recognize
our innate freedom and the choices we have, and the real being very aware of the strength
of our karma, the strength of our habitual patterns. And as samsara beings, the strength
of our ignorance, the strength of our hopes and fears and how we are kind of propelled
by habitual patterns. And so by the beauty of the practices, we have these skillful means
again to release what's negative, engage in the positive, take on the paramitas practices,
in in shamatha, in vipassana. When we catch ourselves in the negative, kind of moving
from a negative motive, like being totally honest with ourselves, recognizing that and
purifying, recorrecting and reorienting our motivation, connecting again with what we
truly value, what really sings in our heart, what we value, how it connects with our bodhicitta,
how it connects with the commitment we've taken in our path and our practice and aligns
with our bodhicitta motivation, and the view and our practice and the instructions we've
been given. The results of virtuous and unvirtuous actions, which are causes are inevitable.
And again, being mindful, alert, conscientious, so important for all of us. Again, we're all
aspiring Dzogchen yogis and yoginis with this big aspiration for not only our own freedom
and liberation, but the liberation of every single living being in throughout all the
omniverse, or at least but connecting with our motivation. So even if it's just wishing
we had more authentic motivation for that, or wishing we wished for that, you know, wherever
we are in that, it's so beautiful, it's so powerful, so strong. And again, we shouldn't
mix up our view and the great openness of our situation, of the great perfection with
the truth of cause and effect. Like Longchenpa has a beautiful quote, "Until grasping ceases
in stainless space the karma of cause and result manifest compounded by the mind and
performed by the mind." All these phenomena occur in the mind. The mind names the appearances
of mind. So therefore, in order to subdue the mind of delusion, be diligent. Or like
Guru Padmasambhava says, "My view is as vast as the sky. My attention to cause and effect
is as fine as flower." And like Kenshin Poldan Rinpoche said so beautifully, "If we love
the result, the idea of the result, the goal of the result, then we need to love and nurture
the causes even more." And again, how precious that we have this opportunity, just like imperman
ence
isn't just a bummer to know about. Impermanence, again, is the gateway to understanding the
openness of the situation. Without impermanence, nothing could change. Which means also, right,
change for the good, change for more true, free, flowing experience of wisdom, love,
compassion. The same goes with karma and what might even be appearing as an obstacle. Gives
us the opportunity again to relax our mind, look to our mind, rest in our rikpa, connect
with our bodhicitta and our motivation, and also along with those relative level things,
maybe listen a little more closely. So I think I'll stop talking now. But again, just reflecting
on these karma, cause, result is inevitable. The fully ripened effects of in samsara, of
virtuous and non-virtuous actions is said to be, non-virtuous actions is said to be
born in the lower realms. With again, the most severe, strong karma, negative karma
being born within the hell realms. And then the lesser degrees, hungry ghosts and lesser
degrees of negative emotions and activities in the animal realm. And then again, kind
of more blocky view, the results of, the fully ripened results of our positive actions born
within samsara, born in the higher realms. The most refined, powerful, maybe born in
the god realms and the asura realms less. And then again, the human realms. Then there's
also, like again, just to reflect on these truths of our cause and reflect that the fruit
or the result is always going to reflect the seed. If we plant a sweet, the seed of a sweet
fruit and nurture it, it's going to bring sweet fruit. If we plant a seed of a bitter
fruit, it's going to bring a bitter fruit. If we plant something mixed, it will bring
mixed. Likewise, you know, the kind of immediate results of our virtuous and un-virtuous actions,
we can reflect on the inevitability. Taking life, for example, the Buddha says, results
in a short, short life. Protecting life, nurturing life, results in long life, healthy life,
wealthy life. The environment that we experience, again, I'm not going to go through all the
different, these 10 non-virtuous, but can just give a taste of it. The environments
we live in as well, the results of, you know, kind of negative activities as far as the
environment we experience is going to be more unhealthy, more barren, more uncomfortable
and challenging and dangerous as a reflection of our karma as far as the environment. And
likewise, the environment that comes as a result of our positive karma is going to be
more nurturing, bountiful, harmonious, you know, nurturing all these good, positive outer
environmental qualities. So again, our actions are inevitable, reflecting on that truth,
studying more of the words of our precious teachers and the Buddha, Padmasambhava and
all these wonderful commentaries from these great masters. Really, I know I need to look
more and reflect more and even more take to heart, but really all of our actions matter
and do have their results. I truly believe that with our Dharma practice, in this life
we may only see a glimmer of the positive results, but we dedicate the merit for all
beings and trust the words of the Buddha, that it would just continue the vastness of
what's behind what we might glimmer in this life will show truly show and truly be of
benefit. So again, thank you for being with me through my little meandering. And let's
actually take these to heart and each one of us as we can bring the meaning of the teachings
as we know them, each one of us for ourselves into our practice, and we'll go through our
nundra practice. We'll do a few moments of silent meditation and then maybe seven line
prayer with that invoking all of the great lineage masters and then we'll continue with
our nundra practice.
Thank you everyone again. And if I may, I just want to add one little thing from a little
Dharma talk versus maybe I wasn't explicit enough about the good results of our Dharma
practice. So it's kind of implicit with everything we're doing. But when I talked about kind
of the the positive results of connecting with virtue, it was mostly on a little more
samsara level of like the positive rebirths within samsara, which is wonderful and good,
how wonderful for samsara beings ourselves included, but just want to add and say and
rejoice that of course, like as we hear the teachings, contemplate the teachings, apply
the teachings and really connect with our pure motivation and have our actions follow
and that they're in accordance and we're honest with what our current capacities are, then
naturally we're going to just according again to this natural law, move forward, remove
our obscurations and bring out our Buddha nature more. So that means results not only
positive rebirths within samsara, but then moving through the results of moving through
all the path, the five paths and all the realization and results and abilities moving through the
boomies until of course a final and eternal always enlightenment in Buddhahood. So anyway,
I just wanted to kind of put that out clearly. It's not excluded. Thank you.